A GENRE OF COMPOSITE CREATIVITY: MARSIYA AND ITS PERFORMANCE IN AWADH


Madhu Trivedi
University of Delhi

			
Here I aim at exploring how marsiya, an Islamic/Iranian literary tradition, developed in Awadh as a genre of composite creativity. It did not remain merely a medium for invoking sorrow. As a literary genre it represented a synthesis of multiple Indian cultural traditions and provided glimpses of the ganga-jamuni tehzib of north India with Lucknow as its centre. As a musical genre too, it assimilated the traits of both classical canonised forms as well as folk musical varieties then current in Awadh and developed from khwanandagi, chanting, into a most sophisticated musical style. Under the patronage of the Shiite rulers of Awadh (1765-1856) the marsiya rose to unprecedented heights.
   The term marsiya (an elegy) is a derivative of the Arabic risa, which means an oration in mourning. Marsiya, generally speaking, is a poem recited to express sorrow on the death of a person; it is also a poem to commemorate a particular pathetic event. This type of compositions was not rare in Persian literature. The marsiyas of the famous poets Firdausi and Shaikh Sadi, who wrote to commemorate the events of the death of Sohrab and the destruction of Baghdad respectively, are examples in this regard. In India, Amir Khusrau Dehalvi, the doyen of Persian poetry, composed two marsiyas in tarkib-band after the death of Prince Muhammad, the son of Sultan Balban (1267-1287 A.D.) which are found in the anthology known as Ghurratul- Kamal. According to Badauni, “folk used to sing those tarkib-bands and used to chant them as threnodies over their dead from house to house.”1Gradually, marsiya came to narrate the event of the martyrdom of Imam Husain, the grand son of Prophet Muhammad and his kinsmen at Karbala (in Iraq), during Muharram, the first month of Islamic calendar. This event, which has a great sentimental value for the Shi’ite sect of the Muslims, provided a tragic panorama of deep human interest, so much so that a literature wholly dedicated to it came into existence. The Rauzatus- Shohda,2 containing elegies on the incidents of Karbala by Husain Waiz Kashafi, a contemporary of Sultan Mirza Baiqara (1469-1506), and the Dwazdeh Band of Muhatshim Kashani, a poet of the court of Shah Tahmasp (1524-76 A.D.) set the mode for marsiya compositions in Persian.3 
   The history of the evolution of marsiya in India has a uniqueness of its own. From solitary verses and songs of wails and laments it came to acquire the characteristics of epic and heralded a new era in Urdu poetry.4 It thrived on religious ritualism and in this process came to integrate the ceremonies and rituals of Indian origin as well. It portrayed the ethics typical of the Indian way of life and presented the cultural canvass of northern India. And, thus, the significance of marsiya is much more than religious. One important feature, which distinguishes marsiya from the epic poetry, is the fact that it does not present the story of Karbala as a whole. Instead, it deals with a single episode in a poem. This was in requirement with the mourning assemblies, organized to commemorate the events on a particular day during Muharram. This feature had, however, provided enormous freedom to a marsiya writer who elaborated his theme by portraying his own surroundings. As an audience-oriented literary tradition marsiya changed in accordance with the social environment and patronage patterns leading to experimentations and variations incorporating traits of folk and urban theatre and qissa-khwani. 
   Marsiya writing in Awadh was popularised by the local poets of Fyzabad- Afsurdah, Gada and the luminaries from Delhi, which included Sikandar and Sauda.5 An indigenous style of marsiya writing developed in the north with Delhi as its centre, which grew more due to its popular prevalence and cultural vitality and not due to the royal patronage and it drew more from Indian literary and folk forms.6 Even in the marsiyas of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century, which followed Persian style and tradition and written for a select group mostly in qasida form, the fact remains that they have more the appearance of desi kavya (folk poetry). Their lines are in segment and echo the chal (movement), which shows that these were rendered in the dhrupad style. In the later period also in the marsiyas, which were written for a wider audience, there is an inclusion of the savaiyya, doha and chhand of Braj-Bhasha. Murabba dohra-band7 metre was the favourite of Sauda and his intimacy with Braj Bhasha lent further colour to the murabba-dohraband style. The folk poetry metres also remained in currency.8 Sikandar and Sauda extensively used the mutadarik metre and their compositions were rendered in dhrupad form. In view of the growing popularity of marsiya with a larger audience, Sikandar composed marsiyas in Marwari, Punjabi, and Purbi dialects also.9 Sauda also composed some marsiyas in Awadhi and Punjabi.10
   It is significant to note at this juncture that Sikandar and Sauda represented two traditions in the realm of marsiya writing. Miyan Sikendar represents a phase in the development of marsiya wherein the dominant trend was to produce marsiya in a popular manner. He was a professional story-teller (qissa- khwan) and in marsiya-khwani he used the traits of recitational form of drama and included song, narration and intonation, which he borrowed from qissa-khwani and folk varieties like Pandavi and Alha. He was also highly accomplished in classical and folk music. Miyan Sikandar’s style earned a great appeal appeal among the masses.11 
   Sauda was one of the leading Urdu ghazal writers of Delhi who brought the folk form of marsiya on a par with other forms of literary expression and it appealed to both the elite and the populace. Up to the middle of the eighteenth century, there was not a clear distinction between the literary and musical compositions and, as one finds in a Persian travelogue Muraqqa`-i Dehli, all were meant for musical rendering.12 Due to the efforts of Sauda, however, its literary worth began to be recognised He set new standards for marsiya writing and lent a literary colour to his marsiya compositions.13 He was of the opinion that a single piece of imagination may be depicted in a thousand colours even in this branch of poetry and claimed that he had evolved an intricate style of marsiya writing.14 Sauda made several innovations in the form of the marsiya. He enhanced the element of tragedy by emphasising bravery and chivalry as a concomitant of the narration of the actual warfare (jung). He composed marsiyas in the memory of individual heroes and warriors and described the combats, which also necessitated characterisation. This descriptive trend led to the addition of historicity. He also introduced scenic description (manzarnigari) in his marsiyas. Due to the efforts of Sauda some components of marsiya came to be recognised as essential, such as the tamhid (an introduction), which came to be known as chehra at Lucknow, was imbibed from the qasida. It became an essential feature of marsiya writing. He concluded his marsiyas on bain. This too, with certain variations, became a fixed point and maintained at Lucknow. Sauda was the first to write marsiya in musaddas metre.15 These innovations led to an increase in the length of marsiya.16 
As such the marsiya by now prepared itself for the heights it reached in the kingdom of Awadh where experiments were carried much further. A distinct style developed in the marsiya poetry in terms of language and idiom, content, literary and musical form at Lucknow, which became the capital of the kingdom of Awadh from the time of Asaafud Daulah. These marsiyas are invariably written in musaddas (a hexametre) metre, which was found most suitable for lengthy marsiyas.17
   The traditionalists like Afsurdah, Gada and Nazim Lucknawi, who popularised the art of marsiya-khwani, stressed upon the element of pathos and this paved the way to the refinement of the marsiya as a musical genre. The art became standardised with its own rules and came to be known as soz-khwani during the nineteenth century. It included the full- fledged rendering of marsiya, salam (verses rendered as complements or bidding farewell) and ruba`i  (a verse of four hemistiches) and came as a prelude to the mourning assembly. 
   The pioneers in this sphere were Khwaza Hasan Maududi and Mir Ali soz-khwan dhrupadiya.18 The soz-khwani till now is rendered largely in the style evolved by Mir Ali. It is a style of sad and somber music wherein an effort is made to conceal the musicality (ragdari) of the melody: layakari (execution of rhythmic variations and patterns) is not as such maintained. The musical phrases employed in soz-khwani adhere to a unique cadence. The bandish (rhythmical compositions) do not conform to any rhythmic pattern although the bol banao (improvisation of rhythmic passages) and tan taraf (melodic turns for creating a cacophony of wails) move in khayal and thumri style. 
   The soz compositions have two segments: sthayi (the first line or verse of the song) and antara (the verse that follows sthayi employing higher notes of the musical scale). In larger compositions there is a laghu antara (smaller antara), also called dehur, and sometimes a tan antara called teep. This term is derived from the Sanskrit word tipi, which means rendition in the notes of high register. The soz compositions are set in those ragas that evoke pathos and are sung from morning to midnight. Although, in soz- khwani, the khayal style prevailed, it incorporated the characteristics of dhrupad, tappa and thumri also. Its high-pitched vigorous tonal pronunciations were derived from the dhrupad; the zawaid or the glosses of tan-paltas (intricate rhythmic turns) from the khayal; zamzama and tahrir (swift zigzag melodic turns employed in Persian music) from the tappa. The techniques of bol-banao (improvisation of rhythmic passages) and ras-bhav (evoking a sentiment) are taken from the thumri. Thus, soz assimilated the characteristics of all musical styles, then current in Awadh especially the tappa and the thumri (Trivedi 2000: 289-92). It is interesting to note that Syed Mir Ali was a renowned tappa-baz and a pupil of the legendary Miyan Shori.19 
    Soz-khwani was rendered in Persian tradition by a group, which consisted of minimum three performers. The main performer was called sar and he was flanked by two supportive singers known bazu and sarbazu. Sometimes there were two additional singers also, aas and baas. The aas provided drone, as instruments do not accompany soz-khwani, while baas created the tonal varieties by sounding the accordant note involved in the particular rag performed by the soz-khwans. In the present times the famous dhrupad singers Dagar brothers, as well as the shahnai player Bismillah Khan perform soz-khwani also and they represent two distinct performance traditions, the dhrupad style and khayal style respectively.
   Soz-khwani became so popular that it did not remain confined to professional singers only, and began to be learnt (with all its rules and techniques) by many, even women.20 It was learnt and performed as a mark of reverence by them. There were professional women soz-khwans too. Amongst these the class of domni used to perform exclusively in the zanana majlis only. Some of the courtesans of Lucknow such as Haideri Begam, Muhammadi Begam and Nanhi Begam were outstanding in the art of soz-khwani. King Wajid Ali Shah also trained a group of performing women who were known as marsiya-waliyan21 One may notice here a break from tradition. In Deccan and Delhi sources do not mention women marsiya-khwans.
     Due to the efforts of those who cared for literary excellence, the marsiya as a newly graded item of poetry heralded a new era in Urdu literature. It was the time when Shia rituals connected with Muharram (in Indian context) were taking shape and a sort of social exclusiveness and sect consciousness was gaining ground amongst the Shias. The separate Shia congregational prayers were already established.22 Mujtahids (ecclesiastical leaders) assumed religious power, and the period of mourning was extended from ten to forty days, up to the 20th of Safar, the second month of the Islamic calendar.23 The Mourning assemblies (majlis-i aza) and ta’ziya24 processions became frequent. Significantly, these processions displayed all fan fare and provided opportunities to the performing artistes for a display of their skills with out the discrimination of caste and creed or social status. King Wajid Ali Shah used to play dhol-tasha (a band of a large and spherical drum) at the time of the procession of mehndi. The imambaras became the centres of these activities. 
   Many new rituals were accepted in the mourning ceremonies. Marsiya audience by now extended from the capital towns to the tiny villages. In this process, many Indian customs became associated with azadari (mourning), which was performed with great pomp and show, to the extent that Muharram became the living symbol of the Shia culture. It attained the colorfulness of the Dussehra festival. Some of the practices such as mehndi, jhula, or even the elaborate plan of taking out processions and doing ghasht and illumination were of Indian origin. All the events of the seventh Muhurram (the day of the martyrdom of Imam Qasim) were actually depicted One may notice here the picturesque-ness of Iranian processions as well as the grandeur of Ram-Lila. This compositeness was largely due to the fact that many Hindus also adopted azadari. Amongst the Hindus the Sexena and Shrivastava Kayasth and the khatris, were `hamkasa’ with the Muslims, that they had a full cultural affinity with their Muslim counterparts and shared their cultural practices. Local chieftains and influential zamindars also adopted azadari. Thus the circle of audience of marsiya was expanded to its utmost, which was now written to evoke the spirit of art and literature and not merely to excite the emotions of pity and sorrow. A highly respected class of marsiya writers came up to meet the situation. It was quite different from the professional class of marsiya- khwans. 
   Marsiya took shape in accordance with these developments in language, musical form and Shia ritual, and came to reflect all aspects of the culture of Awadh. It became thematic and predominantly descriptive and increased in size. Marsiyas, invariably written in musaddas form, used to be recited from the mimber (pulpit) in the mourning assemblies, which awarded a hallowed significance to the marsiya-composer. The recital of these compositions was in the manner of poetry (tahatu’l lafz), but the marsiya retained some of the traits of the oral epics rendition especially the intonation and to certain extent the histrionics also. The tradition have it that Anis used to rehearse in front of a mirror for hours together in order to ascertain the desired effect in intonation and gesticulation. What is more significant here is the fact that these mourning assemblies of Lucknow had the essence of the mushaira (the literary gatherings), where poetic talents were also judged. It meant that now onwards pathos did not remain the keynote in the marsiya composition and literary overtones became dominant. 
   With this the quality of marsiya writing underwent a remarkable change. Not only was its form was standardised as a literary genre and it became variegated in respect of technique and it widened the scope of Urdu poetry, which was till now confined to erotic themes only. Also, this form did not remain confined to the Muslim community only, Hindu poets also contributed greatly to marsiya poetry: For instance, Chhunnu. Lal Dilgir, who wrote about 500 marsiyas that were extremely popular. According to Munshi Nawal Kishor, the sozkhwani and khwanandagi of Syed Mir Ali, Sultan Ali and many other renowned sozkhwans was mostly based upon the marsiyas and salams of Dilgir.25
   There were structural changes also in the technique of marsiya writing. Previously the marsiyas contained apart from Tamhid (introduction), which was initiated by Sauda, vaqyat (the events), rivayat (incidents and anecdotes), jang (the war) and bain (Rizvi: 286-7). Now, the components of marsiya were rather the chehra (introduction), rukhsat  (bidding farewell to the hero by his kith and kin), amad (the arrival of the hero in the battlefield), sarapa (the description of the limbs of the hero from tip to toe), rajaz (verses read at the battlefield to arouse martial spirit), majra (events), rudad (an account of the circumstances), makalimah (dialogues), ghore aur talwar ki ta’rif  (description of the horse and sword of the hero), jung (the war), shahadat (martyrdom), and bain (mourning). One is prompted to suggest that the element of makalimah was inspired by the samvads of Ramlila and other theatrical representations of folk origin as well as the sawala u jawab of urban theatre which was coming to fore about this period.
   Many leading ghazal writers of Lucknow adopted the marsiya as the sole medium of poetry. The names of Mir Zamir (1191-1855 AD) and Mir Khaliq (1774-1814 AD) are the foremost amongst those who greatly enriched the art of marsiya composition at Lucknow. Zamir brought about changes in the technique of marsiya and evolved together with Khaliq a new pattern. They standardised the form of marsiya.26
   After Sauda Zamir, a pupil of a noted ghazal writer Musahfi, seems to have been the singular successful poet to make a conscious effort in raising the marsiya to a status of adab- ul- marsiya and evolved a new style of its rendition.27 On the aesthetic side he diluted the predominant colour of pathos and sorrow in his marsiyas with that of enthusiasm and he was the first to award the marsiya the essence of the elements of epic. Zamir claims in one of his marsiya to have invented a new style (tarz- i navi):
aage to ye andaz sune the na kisi ke    ab sab ye muqallid huye is tarz-i  navi ke.28
Zamir is correct to a great extent as his style was followed later on. He added chehra (introduction) to his marsiyas as a permanent feature and introduced many new themes such as sarapa29 (the demeanour) of the hero, which was a common practice in many Indian poetical forms and oral traditions, for instance the raso, alha and man.30 But he is not restricted to the description of the physical strength only, he virtually devotes himself to the description of every limb of his hero from top to toe and here he is, apparently, inspired by the nakh-shikh varnan of the Sufi and Riti poets. The only difference is that instead of a heroine, he describes the nakh-shikh of his hero who is ready for a combat.
  Zamir also added vividness and colorfulness to jung (battles) by introducing ghore aur talwar ki tarif (the description of the horse and the arms), a trait that he probably borrowed from the charan (bard) tradition. Previously description of jung was either avoided or treated in brief. But Zamir regarded it a necessary part of the marsiya and spe cialised in the description of battle (razmiya mazamin) and provided authentic details about war techniques, arrangement of the forces in different formations, weapons and avoided or treated in brief. But Zamir regarded it a necessary part of the marsiya and specialised in the description of battle (razmiya mazamin) and provided authentic details about war techniques, arrangement of the forces in different formations, weapons and many other articles of war equipage. Besides, he described the arts of combat and self defense practiced in the Awadh region such as bank (combat with knives); binaut (combat with staves); fikiyat or fhankainti (combat with long wooden sticks); nezabazi (combat with short spear) and patabazi or pata hilana  (combat with wooden swords). In fact these were actually displayed at the time of the mourning processions, and these are displayed, to some extent, even today as rituals. Depiction of landscape (manzarnigari) is another item added to marsiya. Here Zamir has made ample use of similes, metaphors and exaggerated analogies and a profuse Persian diction. His style is otherwise simple and lucid. He composed very lengthy marsiyas and their number amounts to more than two hundred.
   Khaliq specialised in describing assemblies (bazmiya mazamin), leave-taking, martyrdom and bain. These themes beheld like supple clay in his hand and presented by him in a noval manner. For instance, he introduced the element of dialogue at the time of rukhsat (leave-taking). It is not simply bidding farewell by the hero to his kith and kin; he goes to the battlefield with certain assurances and expectations from them. One of the important features of the marsiyas of Khaliq is his portrayal of socio-religious customs especially in those, which describe the martyrdom of Imam Qasim. Most of his marsiyas deal with this theme. Khaliq is noted for the simplicity and the sweetness of his language. He endowed a lyrical gloss to marsiya and composed about 200 marsiyas.
   Dilgir (1781-1846 AD), a pupil of a noted ghazal writer Nasikh, was attracted to marsiya writing on account of the vista of literary expression it offered and the respectability a marsiya writer enjoyed at that time. He did not conform to the style of Zamir and claims to have introduced a new style (naya andaz) of marsiya writing.31 For instance, he does not open his marsiyas with chehra but rather with some moral theme and he sets up the atmosphere for some dramatic event on the fateful day of martyrdom, with details of preparations and evocation of the sense of chivalry. Also, he does not portray the adversaries of his hero as a nonentity or Imam Husain and his followers as super human beings. He stresses on the sermonising element in his marsiyas and gives importance to narration and quotations from Hadis (sayings of Prophet) and other sources. Thus he has laid emphasis on the authenticity of the details except in the context of bain.32
   He dealt the rites and rituals, particularly those shared by Hindus and Muslims alike, elaborately in the marsiyas, which deal with the martyrdom of Imam Qasim. To describe the family of Prophet he referred unconsciously to highest nobility of his days, and the overall picture he provides is that of a joint Hindu family. The concept of kutumb and biradari is quite pronounced in his marsiyas. The tone of ethical values becomes highlighted in his marsiyas. His choice of poetical metres indicates his knowledge of well-developed musical airs. He was a prolific writer and his marsiyas became immensely popular during his lifetime.33 
   The early marsiyas of Fasih (b. 1780 AD) centre round the theme of pathos and affliction and he upholds the mannerism of Delhi. Later on he shifted to lengthy marsiyas, which do not necessarily include all the components of Lucknow school of marsiya writing, as chehra and such other formal aspects do not form part of his marsiyas. Like Dilgir, Fasih too seems very keen to give prominence to narration (waqyanigari). But he has versified only the traditional narrative (rivayat) and that too in a ritualistic manner. But he seems interested in the description of battles (rajaz, jung). The tone of ethical values (akhlaqi mazamin) was high pitched in the marsiyas of Fasih.34 The use of lengthy metres is a peculiar characteristic of Fasih’s marsiyas, as if he was still writing not for recital from the pulpit but for the mourning processions. This reminds one of the good old marsiyas of the Deccan and Delhi days. There is a certain archaic touch in his language. He uses words and phrases no longer in common usage such as talwar- karna, daryav, aave, lave and also the phrases of Awadhi such as sammukh, paithana etc. which were considered as matruk in the poetic language of the time. He composed more than 100 marsiyas.  
   The various components of marsiya assumed new proportions in response to new aesthetic urges in the poetry of Mir Anis (1802-1874 AD) and Mirza Dabir (1803-1875 AD). They popularised and perfected the trends set by Zamir and Khaliq and their contemporaries and accorded this branch of poetry such a high poetic standard) that it was considered by some as the finest in the poetic art.35 They did not introduce new forms, but widened the scope of every ingredient of marsiya. Their marsiyas represented the Awadh of their time, the dictates of the society they lived in and the socio-cultural norms they had full faith in. The heroes of both these poets reflect the values of the aristocratic Awadh society. The social etiquette, the behaviour of the youngsters towards their elders, the womenfolk given to rites and rituals and the chivalry of the heroes are all seen through the glasses of a definitely dated kind. The characters involved in the tragedy every now and then talk and behave like the gentry (shurfa) of the Awadh society. More poignant the situation, more subtle the sentiment and more telltale is the impact of the atmosphere and surrounding in which the marsiyas of Anis and Dabir were composed and they show a deep insight in human nature. Their poetry has all the grandeur of qasida.
   Anis, who hailed from a family of littérateurs,36 is noted for his fluent and idiomatic diction, simplicity of style and expression and the flight of imagination. Dabir displayed lofty ideas, great erudition and the grandeur of language.37 The Lucknow style of poetry is more pronounced in his marsiyas. Both of them have enriched the language and endowed it vigour. Anis was conscious of his exclusive diction and ways of expression as one finds him proclaiming that he has used the rozmarrahi, the spoken dialect of the gentry of Lucknow.38 But Dabir went a step further and he has chosen his diction in accordance with the scholarly tradition of his period. In this way he echoed Nasikh, one of the prominent ghazal writer of Lucknow who favoured a language weighted with high-flown Arabic and Persian words.39  One talks like a person of highly refined taste and the other like a scholar talking out of the books. Every marsiya of Dabir follows a different pattern:
                           shukr-i khuda ke sirqe ki had se bai`d hun
                           har marsiya mein mujid-i tarz-i jadid hun.40  

  Dabir’s marsiyas are different in yet another way. He does not portray a single event or project a single hero. Instead, he provides the details of the events in a way that every one in the family seems to be busy as if on a stage and the central figure in every marsiya is Imam Husain. Anis treats his theme in a different manner. His description revolves round a particular hero, the martyr of a particular day of Karbala. Dabir does not observe this pattern; the entry of the martyr of the day is quite late in his description. 
 As is evident from the compositions at Deccan and Delhi, marsiya earlier on expressed the emotions of a sect of mourners having immense faith in Imam Husain. Beyond this other sentiments were almost excluded. Anis and Dabir widened the scope of the portrayal of other sentiments also, especially Anis in whose poetry it is not very difficult to recognise the nine ras of Braj-Bhasha poetry. The theme of marsiya was undoubtedly the tragedy. But this tragedy was a complete picture in action. It provided esthetic pleasure derived from sublime pathos and awe. It exited passions, which were healthy. Anis has even delineated the sketches of shringar at some places. The wife of Abbas, while performing bain over the dead body of her husband, suddenly becomes reminiscent of the sweet memories of her beloved:
 Allah tha yeh aaj ki shab tak, hamara pyar   uth uth ke dekhte the mere munh ko bar bar
main kahati thi ke so raho, ik aan mein nisar   kahte the ro ke, ab yahi suhbat hai yaad gar
                furqat mein vasl ki sahar u sham fhir kahan
                 sona to hashr tak hai ye aaram phir kahan.41
   It may be noted here that Anis represented a long-standing tradition of learning nurtured in medieval north India wherein knowledge of Indian literary traditions was deemed as essential as that of Arabic and Persian. He had great expertise in Braj- Bhasha poetry.
   Both Anis and Dabir emphasised greatly on the literary aspect of marsiya.  Anis echoed Sauda when he proclaimed:
Guldasta- ma`ani ko naye dhang se bandhun  
Ek  phul ka mazmun ho to sau dhang se bandhun
One of his marsiya opens with these lines:
yar ab ab chaman-i nazm ko gulzar iram kar 
 Aye abr-i karam khushq ziraat pe karam kar 42
  Although, at some places, Anis upholds that mourning and lamentation has a religious significance and that marsiya should prepare the ground for epitomizing grief. He says:
                jalsa nahin mazlum ki yeh bazm-i `aza hai
                yan rone ki lazzat hai rulane ka maza hai 43  
		……		……		……	
Mardum ke liye vajib `aini  hai ye zari  
      Rona hi wasila hai shifa`at ka hamari 44

 However, as most of his marsiyas generally yield, this objective does not dominate his poetry and his marsiyas stand for literary excellence. 
   As we have noticed, the mourning assemblies at Lukhnow also had the essence of a literary gathering, wherein poets were appreciated for their poetic achievements. Dabir consciously made efforts in this respect and used marsiya as a medium for the display of his literary skill:
ab rayat-i zaban sar-i mimbar `alam karun…phir ma`ani- i buland ka lashkar ba ham karun
majlis pe aashkar viqar-i `alam karun…rayat mein silk-i nazm ke parcham ko zam karun45

He is the foremost to write rubais, salams and marsiyas in a variety of style. One of his marsiya, mehr-i `alam sarvar-i akram hua tala’, is entirely ghair-manqut i.e. in it only those letters are used which do not have diacritical points.46 Once in a gathering, wherein Dabir presented a marsiya in this style, One of the leading ghazal writer Atish applauded by saying that in choice of diction he has found it of the same stature as that of Faizi’s tafsir:47
                          `aqs- i `alam u `alam –i ma`mur ka `alam
                           gah mah ka, gah, mehr ka gah taur ka `alam.48
  The mazmun-bandi of Dabir is, undoubtedly, excellent. He has explored variety of themes and delineated them in detail:
 .                      mimber pe kya main peshkash-i Murtaza` karun
                        han nazar nazm ke gauhar-i bebaha karun (11: 391/21).49
 In marsiya opening with the line jab mah ne nawafil -i shab ko ada kiya’he claims:
                   is nazm se khazal hain cheh Sa`di cheh Anwari
                  har misra-i buland hai shamshir-i Hyderi 50    
   One may find in the marsiyas of Anis and Dabir the depiction of familial love and such other bonds, which tie one individual to another. Every one has great considerations for his relationship with others- as father, brother, sister, son or as a faithful servant. He also tries to portray the temperament and qualities of his characters, the way they conduct themselves and the moral values and virtues they adhere to. Their loyalty, obedience, allegiance, reverence, devotion and faithfulness and sometimes-even contrariety and dissention have been delineated in great details. 
   These characters in the marsiya are not of a definitely dated kind; one may find them in every walk of life. Anis and Dabir portray them the women at its best. The portrayal of the character of Zainub, the sister of Imam Husain, by Anis brings out well the agreeableness and pleasantness of a woman in an Indian household. She virtually dominates in the family, supervises each and every thing and takes care of the emotions of others. She has tremendous control over her emotions even in great distress. The other character, which Anis has portrayed in great details, is Sakina, the youngest daughter of Imam Husain, who is totally unaware of the hardships of the family. Anis pictures the child psychology with great ease and in all colourfulness: their innocence, curiosity and their tantrums and unending demands. Banu, the wife of Husain, on the contrary, is shown as a very quite person, and she is extremely respectful to her sister in law and has immense faith in the family traditions. 
   In the marsiyas of Dabir also Zainub occupies an important place. She bids farewell to every warrior and we find her busy making arrangements in the family for all sorts of things.51 However, she appears to be slightly subdued to the aura of her brother. In stead, Dabir has projected the character of Banu. She is the grand daughter of Noshervan, the ruler of Iran.52 In the marsiya, which opens with the line`ran ki zamin namuna-i `arsh-i jalil hai’ and deals with the martyrdom of Akbar, even the enemy Umar mentions this fact with reverence. In another marsiya also, Dabir has projected Banu’s emotions at the time of the rukhsat of Akbar in a picturesque manner:
Akbar ki har ik baat pe tharrati hai Banu   maathe pe shikan dekh ke bal khati hai Banu
kuchh sochne lagte hain to ghabrati hai Banu   murte hain jo run ko to mui jati hai banu
                                 ik haath kaleje pe dhare, ik jabin par
                                  ankhon ko jhukaye huye baithi hai zamin par 
She is emotionally surcharged, yet not crying or performing bain in the manner of Zainub, in stead, pouring her heart in her words:
pala tha esi din ke liye to ke juda ho     aankhon ki na `ainuk ho na piri ke `asa ho
ham dhundhe dulhan aur tumhe shauq-i qaza ho   irshad samajh kar karo nahaq na khafa ho
                             han karti hun, vari, na nahin karti hun, vari 
                              nazuk hai mizaj aapka, main darti hun vari53
 Sakina, too, is not portrayed like an innocent girl. Her dialogues at the time of bidding farewell to her father are quite mature.54She performs bain at the death of Abbas and says to his wife:
maine tumhe bewa kiya, randsala pinhaya  hai hai meri ik pyas ne sab ghar ko rulaya. 55
 Anis depicts Imam Husain as a normal human being. He takes every care of his relatives (`khayal-i khatir-i ahbab chahiye har dam’) and mourns and betrays emotions over his dead like an ordinary person by lamenting and performing bain.56 Dabir’s portrayal of Imam is as a super human with an aura and a halo of divinity.
   Anis and Dabir portray the family of Imam Husain as an aristocratic Indian family. The images, which come up, reveal the socio-cultural set up of Awadh. In describing the dress ensemble of Imam Husain and his warriors Anis has virtually described the contemporary sartorial fashion of Lucknow. Imam Husain wears shamla,57 pataka (a waste-band).58 Even in that desert the establishment of Imam has that entire fanfare which was typical of the rulers of Lucknow. The arrival of Imam in the plains of Karbala does not indicate the hardships of the travellers under duress, what one finds is the image of the glamour of the procession of a ruler:
 hoshiyar ghafilon ke sawari qarib hai59 
   The camp of Imam is visualised by him as darbar.60 The sound of naubat and shahna in the morning fills the surroundings with happiness.61 Every care is taken of the parda of the ladies of the Imam’s household, haramsara as he calls it.62 Anis generally uses the expression deorhi, which was prevalent amongst Rajputs and also was in use for the royal residence of the rulers of Awadh.63Imam’s family is referred as kunba, a colloquial expression for kutumb, and gharana.64 The members of the family of Imam Husain converse with him with folded hands (hath jor ke), an Indian way of showing respect to elders or superiors.65 There are several examples: dast-i adab ko jor ke;66  `hathon ko jorti hai ye bhaina asir-i gham;67 qadmon pe gire hathon ko jore jo vo zi jah;68 `bachchon ne ki jo jor ke haathon ko yeh taqrir;’69 rakha pisar ne pavon pe sar haath jor ke.70 At his deathbed Hazrat Abbas desires: `rakh do mera sar qiblq-i `Alam ke pavon par.’71 
  When Hazrat Abbas leaves for the battlefield and bids farewell to the family, Zainub blesses his wife: 
sar ko laga ke chhati se Zainub ne ye kaha    tu apani mang kokh se thandi rahe sada.72 
   This type of blessing is typically Indian. The expression, mang aur kokh thandi rahna, signifies the longevity of husband and a blessing for children, used by Hindu women. Similarly, the expression mang ujarna signifies the status of widowhood. The youngest son of Hazrat Abbas tells about the demise of his father in this manner:
amma ki mang ujar gayi, sadme guzar gaye.73 
  At the time of leaving for Kufa Akbar, the son of Imam Husain comes to meet his sister Sughra, who reminds him to remember her on auspicious occasions and keep her due gift (neg):
haqdar hun main neg ki mera bhi rahe dhyan.74 
   One is prompted to suggest that the Muslim women commonly used such expressions. The use of tere vari is more frequent than qurban jaun. The marsiyas of Anis and Dabir provide numerous examples of such idioms that make it evident that the women of Muslim families used a language which was not very distinct from their Hindu counterparts and that they shared their beliefs and customs and superstitions. At several places we find such examples:
Zainub ne kaha kyon mujhe visvas na aaye75
 ……        ……..       …….      …….    
 bin -byaahe mere laal ne kyon laash uthaai 76

  main maa hun, na sahib, mujhe yeh baat na bhaai…. Akbar meri atthara baras ki kamaai.77
   All the ladies said at the time of the death of Zainub’s sons:

sab ne kaha lo sheh ki bahin ho gayi be-aas78 
Kubra, the newly wedded wife of Qasim, mourns at his death:
                           vo kahti thi ke jaag ke taqdir so gayi
                            bibi na pakron haath ke main raand ho gayi.79
 Zanub says:
daulat koi maa jaye se pyari nahin hoti   ….’80
dekha jo lahu bacchon ka, chhati umand aayi  nazdik tha mar jaaye Yadullah ki jaai
par Fatima ke sabr ki shaan usne dikhaai   sab se ye kaha neg lagi meri kamaai 81
hai hai ye tumhe kis ki nazar kha gayi bacchon…’82
mujh ko bahut khayal hai Zehra ki jai ka;83
  Women especially in the Braj and Purab region use jai and jaya for daughter and son in north India. At many places Imam Husain is referred as Fatima ka lal and Asadullah ka lal (son).84 Husain addresses his sister as bhaina,85 Bali is used for a young girl;86 raand is also a frequently used expression for a widow.87
   These colloquial words and phrases are also quite common in the marsiyas of Dabir: kunba, hujiye (huyeye), chah, charcha, sidhare hai (gaye hain), suhagan, dhyan, Rabba, churcha hua, tap (fever),88 Yadullah ki jai, Asadullah ki jai, `Ali ka lal bhaina, munh dhaapna Dabir uses aswar for sawar in the Charan tradition. Lahu.89 
   There are many words from Braj Bhasha and Awadhi woven all over in the fabric of  marsiyas of Anis, such as lahu, nirala, dhyan, dhun, kunba, charcha, ran, nar, tan, tap, pahar, byaah, bhaina, visvas.90 Apart from this there is a typical blend of Indian and Persian phrases. Some of these show the impact of the zaban- i charani, the language of the bards: 
jo khet mein sar sabz ho sawant vahi hai91.
jo baat pe sar de wo sakhawat ka dhani hain 92
 shashdar nahin hote jo shuj’at ke dhani hain93
hathon ko jorti hai ye bhaina asir -i gham.94
   The word sidharna is used variously and frequently, indicating the death of a revered person or his departure:95
  yeh kahate hi bas gulshan-i duniya se sidhare 96
 puchha na jannat ki taraf kaun sidhara);97 duniya se sidhare (10: p. 301/12).
   Anis is well known for his idiomatic diction, which provides ample opportunities to learn the nuances of the conversational style of the gentry that included Hindus and Muslims both. There are some archaic expressions borrowed from the charan tradition which are generally witnessed in the description of battle: bag lena,98 bag firana,99 ghore ko garmana,100 ghore ko pherna,101 kamar bandhana,  khet parna,102 kariyal jawan103 and so on:
phirta hua lashkar mein chhclava nazar aaya104 
Hazrat ne kaha lut gayi baba ki kamai.105 
   Dabir has also used the idiom of the women to a great extent:
le le ke balayen kaha chhati se laga kar   lo aag lagi maang mein barbad hua ghar106
ye aatma ki aanch hai, vari, khafa na ho.107
   Interestingly, Anis has also provided, in the midst of these, the illustrations of rekhti, the idioms of Harem, which were used for the first time by his grandfather Mir Hasan in his Masnavi, Sahar ul Bayan and popularised as a form of poetry by Insha and Rangin.108
main sadqe jaun mujh ko tumhari bala lage109 
Dharka hai ke ghabara ke chale aayen na ran se110 
sadqe gayi kuchh kaam hai yan aake sidharo111 
sadqe gayi pani mujhe darkaar nahin hai.112
    Some times the language resembles the one used in the sabha and jalsa, the urban theatrical representations of Lucknow. Banu the wife of Imam speaks to Zainub in the following manner:
ki arz haath jor ke, aye khwahar-i Imam    main hun kaniz aapki aur ye pisar ghulam.113
Anis makes graphic use of similes from Indian mythology. One is prompted to suggest that in spite of the efforts of Sauda, Mir and Nasikh, who tried hard to eliminate the bhakapan from Urdu, some of the characteristics of riti poetry remained ingrained in the poetry of those Urdu poets who hailed from Delhi. To quote one of the examples where in Anis is praising the sword of Imam Husain:
 mojud thee har ghaul mei aur sab se juda thi   dam kham bhi, lagavat bhi, safai bhi, ada bhi,
Ik ghat pe thi aag bhi, pani bhi hawa bhi   amrit bhi, halahal bhi, Masiha bhi, qaza bhi.114
   There are several examples of the style of poetry that developed at Lucknow and thrived on figures of speech like riyayat-i lafzi:
pyare hamre bhai ko bhai hai kya jagah.115
   Riyayat-i lafzi, popularised at Lucknow by Miyan Amanat during the mid ninteenth century, also found expression in Dabir’s poetry:  
pyare ki badi aah mere sar pe na aayi     haye haye, teri aayi hui sab ghar pe na aayi116 
   Rukhsat is dealt by Anis in a manner that it brings out the dramatic content of marsiya to the fore and incurs emotion, dialogues, intonation and histrionics at the time of recitation. One of its excellent examples is the rukhsat sought by Akbar from Zainub and Banu, who after great persuasion allow him to go for battle. But they want him to go in the attire of a bridegroom, which is an Indian custom amongst the Rajputs. Akbar refuses and says:
ham kis tereh se pahne, yah shadi ka paharavan   Abbas namdar ne paya nahin kafan
                       bhai ke gham mein chhak ghareban hai Shah ka 
                       mar kar kafan mile yahi jora hai byah ka.117
This entire episode is stretched in 35 verses.118
  At the time of rukhsat to the battlefield, Zainub tells her sons to take care of each other:
bhai kisi hangam mein bhai ko na chhore…dono  mein koi `aqada kashai ko na chore.119
   Amad has all the glamour of the contemporary urban theatrical representations, jalsa and sabha and one is rsminded of the arrival of the actors on the stage.120
hai shor- i  amad amad- i shah- falak sarir121
 tha  shor ke amad hai ye mahbub-i khuda ki122 
 amad hai karbala ke naitan mein sher ki   deorhi se chal chuki hai sawari diler ki
ab jaati hai ran ko `Ali Akbar kisawari.123
The amad of Imam Husain in the battlefield is describrd by Dabir in a manner as if he is proceeding to the court and not to the battlefield:
mujre ke liye `arsh ke sukkan nazar aaye    Qur`an ke sayyare liye haft salam aaye
sitare ye kahte huye manind-i ghulam aaye    hoshiyar, janab aaye, huzur aaye, Imam aaye.124
tashrif janib-i dar-i daulat Husain laye     ……..        ………..              ……
khudam panj-i naubati i- hashmat bajate aaye     ………..        ……….125
   ghul par gaya mahal mein hai amad huzur ki.126
  Here he is virtually describing the processions of the Awadh rulers. Imam is projected like a king. There is an aura reflected in his personality. He is Sultan-i din (3: 134/41) sultan -i mashriqain.127

 Sarapa is done by Anis as a ritual and generally short and in the contemporary tradition. He describes the beauty of his hero and not his valour. While describing the sarepa of Abbas and Qasim he says:
ankhen wo ghazalan-i khatan jin pe tasadduq   rukhsar wo nazuk ke chaman jin pe tasadduq.128
  rukhsaron pe gesu hain ke ke hai chhand gahan mein.129
The sarapa of the warriors of Husain is presented by Anis in this way:
 rukh chaand se raushan, to badan phulon se khushbu  rukhsaaron pe sumbul se latakte huye gesu130
   Not all marsiyas of Dabir have sarapa, but whenever he does it, he delineates it in full.131 He was the first to write the sarapa of Hur.132
   He provides minute details of every limb of his hero, even the pupil, eye’lashes and eye brows do not escape his attention as one find in the sarapa of Ali Akbar.133
   Bain, a Persian word meaning separation, is borrowed in its present connotation in marsiya from Punjabi folk poetry and tappa songs, which were woven around the theme of love and vexation caused by the memory of the departed beloved. Sikandar and Sauda, who hailed from Punjab, introduced it in their marsiyas and gradually it became a fixed point in the marsiyas at Lucknow.The bain in Anis is quite detailed, generally streching to 15 to 20 verses and sometimes to 30 verses. At the death of Akbar he sums up by saying:
 Likhu haram ke bain to, hoti hai ik kitab134
Significantly in most of his marsiyas, the bain.is performed by Zainub. 

   Bain is the theme where Dabir shines most and the descrption is very natural.135 
Dabir does not always conclude his marsiyas on bain. At some places the bain is devised at the time of rukhsat. 
   There were certain rituals associated with bain, which are describrd by Anis in his poetry.136There were typical expressions of grief:
 pyaase suye firdaus sidhare mere ghar se.137
   Bain brings out the spoken idiom and the customs associated with the mourning, especially widowhood (randapa), its most important symbol was a randsala, probably a shawl. This ritual is peculiar to Awadh of the ninteenth century. The wife of Hazrat Abbas tells Zainub:
bibi ye sab hamare randape ke taur hain.138
 There is a new connotation of jihad and ghazi in the marsiya of Anis and Dabir. The battlefield of Karbala is the platform of struggle between right and wrong. It is projected as a jihad in that sense and the warriors on Imam’s side are ghazi.139 One marsiya of Anis opens with these lines:
kya ghazian-i fauj-i khuda nam kar gaye140
Dabir uses the term, lashkar -i kuffar for the army of the enemy of Imam.
yak baar pari lashkar –i kuffar mein halchal141 
Dabir also uses the term jihad as the varient of war142 
   Manzarnigari is Anis’s forte. His poetry depicts nature in all its colours and he uses graphic similes in portraying it. Some of his marsiyas provide excellent examples of scenic beauty. The description of the burning heat of the desert of Iraq, where the tragedy took place, or the fatal thrust of the warriors and their hardships of travelling under duress is, however, done by him as a ritual. In fact the flora and fauna he describes is solely Indian He talks about blue dawn, the morning breezes, the dew- drops, the chirping of birds, the sounds made by peacocks and even deep forests infested with lions and other animals.143While describing the subeh-i Ashur, Anis speaks of the sabza zar sehra instead of the hot sand.144 He is virtually delineating the North Indian plains with its lush green meadows (sabza zar sehra): 
  vo nur- i subh aur vo sehra wo sabzvar   vo tairon ke ghaul darakhton pe beshumar
chalna nasim subh ka, rah rah ke bar bar   ku ku vo qamriyon ki  vo taus ki pukar.145
 One of the finest examples of poetry of Anis:
chalna wo bad- i subh ke jhokon ka dam ba dam    murghan- i bagh ki wo khush ilhaniyan ba ham
wo aab u tab-i nahar wo mauzon ka pech u kham    sardi hawa mein, par na zyada bahut na kam 
                		kha kha ke ous aur bhi sabza hara hua
      kha motiyon se daman-i sehra bhara hua146
   Sometimes Anis opens his marsiyas with the description of nature.147His marsiya` jab qat` ki masafit- i shab aftab ne’ is one of the finest example of the depiction of the scenic beauty in Urdu literature. 
  Dabir does manzarnigari as a ritual. He indicates the end of spring season in the manner as below:
kul ek hafta bagh mein gul mehman hai   sabza gul-i bahar ki rukhsat ka pan hai148
While describing dawn, he says:
laila-i shab ke husn ka gulshan khizan hua149 
 tha sham se birhaman –i shab jo qamar- parast   
  khurshid ne lagai ise zarb pusht-i dast150
   Generally speaking, the manzarnigari of Dabir is for the display of san`atgari.
   Dialogues form an important ingredient of the marsiya literature and at many places they appear like the samvad (conversation) of Ramlila. For instance, when Imam reaches the battlefield, a dialogue commences with the enemy: 
maidan mein aa ke kahane laga Shamar be-adab   taqat `Ali ki kya hui larte nahin ho ab
Reply of Husain:
                           tu janta hai ibn-i Ali ko haras hai 
                        mujh ko faqat Rasul ki ummat ka pas hai151
   Dialogues are all over woven into the fabric of marsiya, opening with the line, `farzand-i payamber ka Madina se safar hai,’ to the extent that it appears as if it has been written for stage representation. Every one is seen busy in leave-taking and meeting friends and relatives and exchanging compliments and conversing with each other. What Anis presents here is a perfect picture of a family gathering.152This situation is entirely dramatic and Anis exploits every opportunity to delineate such situations through dialogues.
   Like Anis, Dabir has also has devised dialogues in a manner that reminds us of the theatrical representations. In the battlefield the Imam observes all those courtsies  (tehzib -i akhlaq) for which Lucknow is famous. When enemy asks for an introduction, Imam introduces himself like the shurfa of Lucknow:
tum kaun ho, farmaya ke gharib azli hun     batji ka nabizada Husain ibn `Ali hun.153 

   In the marsiya, kis ka `alam Husain ke mimbar ki Zeb hai, there are many situations which appear to be a part of stage show and have dialogues and action both.154 Dabir sometimes opens his marsiya with a dialague. One such example is the marsiya `asghar pe jab ki pyas ki shiddat sawa huyi’ wherein the whole episode of the martyrdom of Asghar is related through dialogues.155
   In the battlefield Husain tries to convince the Qaris and Hafiz–i Qur`an, that they have memorized it without properly understanding its meaning.:
har lafz ke Imam ne ma’ni dikha diye    darya- i `ilm khushq zuban se baha diye156 
 A dialogue in the samvad style begins with the qaris and the leader of the enemy, Umar.157 
   Another good example, which brings marsiya’s affinity with theatre, is when Akbar comes to the battlefield, the kind of dialogue follows between him and Umar:
          kya kahna tere husn ka afvah sab mein hai
                          Akbar tera hi nam mubarak Arab mein hai 158
Also,
Banu ka char gesuon vala, tu hi hai aah    Naushervan ke ghar ka ujala, tu hi hai aah
binnat-i Ali ki goud mein pala, tu hi hai aah   chashm u chiragh Syed vala, tu hi hai aah.159
   All these verses were rendered with the same intonation as found in the recitational form of drama. The conversation of Husain with Zainub is a good example of it. Some verses appear to be written for stage representation:
Hur to udhar se aaya, idhar se Imam aaye   aaqa ne donon haath mulaqat ko barhaye 160 
   maqtal hai chasn fasl –i bahari ki hai amad,’ which deals with the martyrdom of Akbar, appears to be written for stage representation.161 In the marsiya, `Asghar pe jab pyas ki shiddat siwa hui,’ Husain makes a small grave for Asghar and puts his blood stained tauq on it and says to Banu:
Bibi ye tere hasliyon wale ki qabr hai   Banu ye tere god mein pale ki qabr hai162 
This ritual is observed as jhule ka matam. 
    Some of the marsiyas of Dabir have the traits of qissa. For instance see the beginning of the marsiya, dast –i Khuda ka quwwat - i bazu Husain hai :
kahte hain sahiban -i tawarikh beshtar   jis saal naam –i shah par para qarrua, safar.163
   In a marsiya, `aye shams u qamar nur ki mehfil hai ye mahfil’, Dabir relates the event/episode) in the same manner as is done by a sutradhar (anchor person), who prepares ground for the entry of the actors on the stage:
es vaqt haram kheme main ghabraye huye hai    ham shaql –i nabi bahar –i vida aaye huye hai.164
    In a marsiya, Akbar knowing well the fact that his aunt Zainub will not easily allow Akbar to go for battle, he asks her mother to bring his dress from her. However, Sakina, the younger sister of Akbar has already reported to the aunt that bhayya is going somewhere and mother is crying. Suddenly Zainub appears with the dress in her hand. Dabir describes this situation in this way:
nagah namudar huin Zainub-i  ghamnak    chehre pe male khak, gareban kiye chak
hamrah liye Akbar- i gulfam ki poshak     ghusse se badan r`asha mein aur surkh rukh – i pak.165
   This situation reminds us of some scenes from a contemporary play, Indarsabha.
Anis appears to be well versed in Indian mythology. In a marsiya, which deals with the martyrdom of Abbas, one can find a parallel in a Krishna lila episode where in the jamuna was trying to touch the feet of Krishna through its waves. 
 dala miyan-i nahar mein jo asp-i saba shitab    …….        ……..
maujen barhin barai qadam bosi-i janab   uchhli `alam ko chumne ko mahiyan-i  ab166
   One may refer here to the rivayats composed in the Deccan. One of these projects Asghar as bal Krishna. The mourning songs, deha, current in the rural areas of Awadh and its vicinity, present Imam Husain as Krihna.167 Another interesting phenomena found in these marsiyas is that Husain and his family members hear the voices from beyond from the departed souls, especially Hazrat `Ali and Fatima, the parents of Husain.Like Indian Gods and Divine figures they remain invisible and make announcements, sort of Dev-bani, by way of warning or appreciation. This feature, which assigns divinity to Imam’s family, is certainly borrowed from Indian mythology and indigenous theatre.
	awaz phir Ali ki ye aayi ke aye pisar168 
    This idea of akash bani is more pronounced in the marsiyas of Dabir. God in the manner of Indian Gods grant a boon to Husain:
                                    awaz ye aayi ke wafa karte hain ham bhi
                                     kya mangte ho, maango, `ata karte hain ham bhi 169
 Hazrat ne kaha khun bhare haathon ko utha kar     Rabba, mere Shiyon ko jahannum se riha kar
Rabba, mere zavvron ki tu `umr sawa kar       Rabba, jo mujhe royen bahisht un ko `ata kar170
 aayi ye nida dekho meri vada u wafai171
                                     ek qaza ko aayi, nida asman se
                             tham tham, ke tir chhut ta hai Hur ki kaman se172
    In Dabir’s marsiyas Fatima is always there to share the grief of the family and even to provide instructions regarding rituals etc.173
   Dabir has delineated in detail the rituals and cultural practices followed on the occaision of death. By this time the rituals related to mouring (dastur-i `aza) were formalised in Awadh. Dabir’s marsiya provide a fuller view/glimpses of these. After the death of Hazrat Abbas Husain asks Zainub for making arrangements for mourning (sog ka saranjam) in the following way:
han sog ka Hyder ke syah farsh bichhawo   han rakht-i `aza jis mein wo sanduq mangawo
wo sab ko ye jore `azadar banawo     shappar ki `aza ka hamen tabus pinhawo
                              tum pahno kali kafni aal `aba mein
                              jo Fatima ne pahani thi nana ki `aza mein 
 nauhe mein na`Abbas kahe, na kahe saqqa   jo bain kare, ro ke hai Husaina 
baqi koi dastur-i `aza rahne na paye   sab ek ek karke pursey ko aayen174 
   Indian women are superstitious in certain respects, especially at the time of death. Dabir has taken care of the fact.
   When the widow of Abbas noticed that the dresses of Sakina and Akbar were given as dresses for mouring (poshak-i aza) to her children, she was greatly annoyed and said to Banu:
dono haath jor ke Banu se ye kaha     thahro Khuda ke vaste, hai hai,yeh kya, yeh kya? 
kyo layi farsh-i sog yeh bin byahe ka libas    Zainub bhi be hawas hai laundi bhi be hawas
……            ………        ………..       ……….          ……..          …….                                                                      
                           sab kunba ab to jita hai Akbar ki aas par 
                         sadqa utarun bachchon ko main is libas par 
bas ab sidhariye ke mera saaya par na jaaye 175  
    Some practices are related to marriage:
alqissa `aza khane mein ye byah rachaya    filfaur dulhan, Fatima Kubra ko, banaya 
Qasim ko udhar khil`at-i shahana pinhaya    phulon se ghul -i bagh-i Muhammad ko basaya 
                            bahane sar-i nausha pe aanchal ko urha kar
                             qurban huin masnad-i zarin pe bitha kar
sigha shah bekus ne parha ba dil -i maghmum    randon mein mubarak ki, salamat ki hui dhum.176
        To sum up, it may be said that marsiya is representative of the compositeness and resilience of the Awadh society wherein the idioms and conventions of the other were freely adopted; a society that had faith in the strength of co-existence with diverse cultural groups. Marsiya took to indigenous poetic, musical and linguistic forms and has the vibrance of Indo-Persian traditions nurtured in Northern India over the centuries. It   became instrumental in inspiring modern Urdu and Hindi poetry of the early 20th century, and we find Hali, Shibli, Iqbal, Josh, Prasad, Pant, Nirala, Mahadevi Verma, echoing the clarion call of marsiya in musaddas form.
     
















	
1 Abdul Qadir Badauni, Muntakhab ut Tawarikh, trans. George S.A. Ranking, Delhi reprint, 1973, Vol. I,  196-97. Badauni has quoted one of those on pp. 197-216.
2 The Rauzatus Shohda had an overwhelming sway on the Shia community in India.  
3 Reza Jadeh Shafiq, Tarikh-i Adabiyat-i Iran (Persian), 1958, 369-70. In India, however, marsiya took its own roots and set up its own traditions, at times, independently of Persian tradition and it developed first in the Deccan as a folk form of poetry. The poetic metres are in quite a few cases distinctly indigenous and the metric pattern corresponds to the chhand-vistar, metric pattern of Braj-bhasha. Moreover the language of these marsiyas is characteristic of the spoken idiom and contains elements of popular speech. It is only in the seventeenth century that marsiya began to imbibe Persian influence in respect of language and choice of metres.
4 The early Deccni marsiya are akin to git (a song) form in its rhythmic structure with a tek, a segment that is repeated after every stanza in the song.
5 Shah Kamal Kara Manikpuri, Majma ul-Intikhab (1219 AH/1804) Persian, ed. Nisar Ahmad in Teen Tazkire, Delhi, undated, p. 52; Shaikh Ghulam Hamadani Mushafi, Tazkira- i Hindigoyan (1209 AH/1794), Persian Ms., Reza library Rampur, f. 80; Karimuddin Khan Panipati, Tabaqatus- Sho’ra -i Hind  (1848), Urdu MS., Reza Library, Rampur, f. 315.  
6 A number of marsiyas of Qasim Dehalvi, Murad, Saleh, Qurban `Ali, Sa’dat Yakrang, Hatim and Asim, in all 113 compositions of twenty-one poets are found in in a manuscript, Marasi-i Rekhta, transcribed about 1738 A.D. Qasim Dehalvi is said to have initiated marsiya writing in North India (Rizvi: 190).  
7 A four- line verse followed by a doha in Braj-Bhasha.
8 Sifarish Husain Rizvi, Urdu Marsiya (Urdu), Delhi, 1965: 191; Abul Lais Siddiqi, Lucknow ka dabistan – Shairi (Urdu), Lahore, 1951: 668-69.
9 His well known Purbi masiya as well as another in Marwari Bhasha are both in the metre, which has been identified in India as bahar-i mutadarik which is precisely similar to the chhand- vistar (metric span) of Alha of Jagnik Kavi. Their opening lines are as under:
ban karbal mein banu bitiya naina nir bahavat hai-It is his well known Purbi marsiya.
kaain kahi ab mhaako shahan ghani katak charh chhai chhin (Marwari).
10 His Punjabi marsiya opens with the line `kuk di jainub pitt ke sar nu , sade jind khapadan’ and his Awadhi marsiya as follows-`chav bhare aye banre kasim, aa banri teri yaad mein rove’
Both of these are composed in bahar-i mutadari; Rizvi: p. 195.
11 `Waqyat-i Karbala ra dar jigar kharash alfaz bayan me dada u marsiya nez khub me gufta’, Abdullah Khan Zaigham (Persian), Hyderabad ,1886: 60.
12  Dargah Quli Khan, Muraqqa`-i Dehli  (1739), Persian, ed. Nurul Hasan Ansari, Delhi, 1982: 75-80.
13 Rizvi: 1965, p. 191
14 Madhu Trivedi, Cultural History of  the Kingdom of Awadh, 1977, Ph. D. Thesis, Aligarh University: 9-  
15 . Rizvi: 191; Siddiqi: 668-69.
16 Even though the traditional concept of invoking sorrow remained intact in the compositions of Sauda
 (khud rove aur dusron ko rulave), his style was apparently not liked by the people. Their main criticism
 was that his compositions lacked the essence of pathos (marsiyas) and were mere poetry (Muhammad
 Husain Azad, Ab-i Hayat, [Urdu], Lucknow, 1982: 157). There was, however, some supporters too, like
 Mir Insha and Ahad Ali Yakta, who opined that these `blind persons’ do not understand that the marsiya
 too is characterised as poetry (Trivedi, 1977: 10). The above discussion prompts us to suggest that there
 was a controversy in this period regarding the literary status of marsiya. However, it soon began to
 develop in accordance with the standards set by Sauda.
 17Previously the marsiyas, in north India, were generally written in qasida form and consisted of twelve or
 twenty-four band  indicating the number of twelve Imams or twenty-four masumin (children) respectively.
 Masnavi form was rarely used in the north. 
18 Muhammad Karam Imam Khan Unnami, Ma`dan ul Musiqi (written in 1856, in Urdu), Lucknow, 1925: 37; Azmat Ali, Muraqqa –i Khusrawi, Urdu Ms, 1869, Tagore Library, Lucknow University, Lucknow: f. 226a; Abdul Halim Sharar, Ghuzishta Lucknow: Mashriqi Tamaddun ka akhiri namuna, Urdu, ed. Rashid Hasan Khan, Lucknow, 1965, rpt., Delhi, 1971: 304.
19 Imam: 23, 30; Tappa was an intricate musical genre evolved by Ghulam Nabi Shori. It was a unique blend of indigenous classical and folk traditions with techniques used in Persian muqam (i.e. rag).
20 Sharar: 305-6.
21 Najmul Ghani Khan, Tarikh -i Awadh, Urdu, 1919: 54. 
22 Muhammad Faiz Baksh, Tarikh-i Farah bakhsh  (1815-16), Persian Ms, Abdul Salam Collection, Maulana Azad Library, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh.  f. 252-a. The Shia namaz – i zamat was conducted by Syed Dildar Ali Ghufran Ma’ab during the reign of Nawab Asafud Daulah on 13th Rajab 1200 A. H./17 A. D. Sarfarazud Daulah Hasan Reza Khan mongered it. Syed Dildar Ali Ghufran Ma’ab (d. 1820) was the first Shia mujtahid at Lucknow.
23 Ahad Ali, Waqai Dilpazir (1837, in Persian), English Transl. By Taqi Ahmad as Tarikh -i Badshah Begam, p. 13.
24  Ta’ziyas (tableau): In Iran ta’ziyas were used to dramatise the events of the siege and carnage at Karbala. In India, however, these are used in a different connotation as the replica of the tomb of Imam Husain, which is taken out in procession on tenth day of Muharram.


25 Munshi Nawal Kishor, Ibarat-I Khatima-i Kulliat-i Marsiya-i Dilgir, Lucknow, 1897, p. 496.
26 Rizvi: 285-87; Siddiqi: 676.
27 `Yaron, taqrir se main kar-I qalam karta hun.’
28 See his marsia that opens with the line, `kis nur ki mehfil mein meri jalwagari hai’. 
29 Zamir observes as one of his innovation: 
                   tarz ye marsiya ki thaharai   ke sarapa ho aur saf- arai.

30 Raso: an early medieval oral tradition of poetry recited by the bards (charans) to arouse heroic sentiments. Prithviraj Raso by Chandra Kavi, documented for the first time under Akbar’s patronage, was the oldest and the most popular work in the raso tradition. A whole lot of raso literature was produced in Rajasthan in Braj-Bhasha, dingal, pingal and Bbangri, the dialect of the region.
Alah:  oral epic of the raso tradition woven around the themes of battles of the legendary heroes Alah and Udal of the twelfth century.
Man: it was a musical composition in prakrit and bhakha. Its theme was self-exaltation.

31 ye be sanad ahwal nahin maine likha hai,  Dilgir haqiqat mein ye andaz naya hai.
32 Dilgir ne hadis se hai marsiya kaha    han bain mein to dakhl- i tabi’at hai ja ba ja
ravi ka nam aaya na us mein kitab ka    khali sanad se par nahin ye nazm-i mutaligha
   		aagah rah ru hai har ek is tariq ka
		is ja pe ittifaq hua har fariq ka
33 Siddiqi: 680.

34Siddiqi: 686. 
35 Azad: 101; Taqi: 8; Sharar: 84.  
36 His grand father Mir Hasan was a famous Urdu poet from Delhi, whose Masnavi, Sahar ul Bayan earned fame far and wide and he also authored a tazkira (an account) of contemporary poets in Persian. His father Mir Khaliq was one of those Urdu poets who along with Zamir standardised the form of marsiya writing.
37 Azad: 539-40, 540-1; Sharar, 84.
38 rozmarra ho shurfa ka salasat ho vahi     lab u lahja vahi sara ho mutanat ho vahi
39 See an example of the highly Persianised language of Dabir in the following:
aqs –i chaman-i  rukh se ayan qudrat-i haq hai    rang –i gulshan –i jannat ke muraqqa’ ka varq hai (15: 495/1). 
 Dabir also uses Arabic phrases in his marsiyas quite liberally and quotes from Quran.16: 520/28; 15, 499/20.
40 6: 240/20.
41 13: p. 375/151.
42  For the marsiya opening with this line, see  Anis ke Marsiye, ed. Saleha Abid Husain, Taraqqi-i Urdu Board, Delhi, 1977,  p. 61.
43 See, Anis ke Marsiya, p. 409/48.
44 For marsiya opening with the lines, yaar ab chaman- nazm ko gulzar iram kar, see ibid., pp. 61-91
45 1: p. 38 /6 ;One of his marsiya opens with the line: `aye dabadaba-i nazm, do `alam ko hila de; see Akbar Hyderi edited Intikhab-i Marasi Mirza Dabir, Uttar Pradesh Urdu Academy, Lucknow, 1980, pp. 86-125). The literary overtones remain intact even in those verses that are expressive of extreme devotion and dedication to Husain. For instance in the marsiya, `angushtari -i `arsh ka yarab nagin dikha’ he says:                        
han josh-i taba’ tarz na hasha bigarne paaye   misra na apni rast qadami par akarne paaye
        khud nazm bol uthe ke naya intazam hai afsana yeh nahin jihad- i Imam hai   (11: 399/63).
46 Intikhab –i marasi –i Mirza Dabir, p. 31. A style wherein words without diacritical points are used is known as san`at-i mahmal.
47 Ibid. p. 33. In the marsiya, mehr -i `alam sarvar –i akram hua tala’, there are 72 bands (verses) having only ghair-manqut words. 
48 Intikhab- i marasi Mirza Dabir, p.19:592/2.
49Although he mentions at one place that apne sukhan ki aap shina  sakht `aib hai (7: 300/149),
 at several places he boasts of his literary skill:
ho dhum jahan mein ke ye ta`id-i khuda hai   ye bandish-i mazmun na dekha hai suna hai (2: 86/ )
mazmun naye karta hun ijad hamesha (2:87/4).
main bulbul-i khush lahja-i bosatan-i chman hun(2: 87/5).
main aaj baam-i khutba-i insha –i nazm hun    husn –i bayan se martaba afza –i nazm hun (6:240/20). kis tarz ki raunaq ho is andaz ke aage   jadu kahin chal sakta hai `aijaz ke aage (87/6).
 The marsiya opening with the line `parchum kisi `alam ka shu`a`i aftab ki’is woven around the theme of `alam (banner) of Imam Husain and at least hundred bands are written on it by way of mazmunbandi, a characteristic of Lucknow school of Urdu poetry (1: 37-57).

50 3: 164/184; He concludes this marsiya on this verse.

51 Zainub ne kaha hai meri qismat ka yahi kam   dene lagi matam ke syah jore wo na kam
Fiza se kaha sog ka karti hun saranjam     thand hua, hai hai `alam-i lashkar-i Islam (Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 8 327/129).
52 Ibid., 6: 253/84.
53 Ibid., 13: 446/19; 13: 446/23.
54 ibid.,4: 181-3/79-89, ` adam ka dadras…’.
55 Ibid., 8: 328/137.
56 Imam Husain performs bain over the dead body of Hazarat Abbas (5: p.170/ 235; 8: p. 237/115). Some people showed reservations for this type of depiction of Imam. 
57 7: p, 207/73. Shamla the headgear in fashion in Awadh among the shurfa from the time of Nawab Sa’adat `Ali Khan. Madhu Sharma,`Costume and Costume craft in the Kingdom of Awadh, ’Proceedings of Indian History Congress, Jabalpur Session, 1971.
5812: p. 322412 part of Indian dress ensemble of the upper classes.  
59 Anis ke Marsiye, 13: p. 350/1.
60  Ibid., `darbar mein haazir the rafiqan-i dilavar’ 10: p. 269/11.
61 Ibid. 10: p. 275/42.
62 See Dabir’s these lines: 
 parda uthaya laundiyon ne bargah ka (10: 360/10).
aayi jo dar pe kheme ke paya Husain ko   de kar qasam mahal mein bulaya Husain ko (11: 398/56
63 ibid. 5: p, 153/133.
64 Ibid. `kunbe se munh chhipa ke jangal mein ja rahen’, 16: p. 426/20; Dabir also uses the expression kunba kutumb (4: 189/121) and gharana. `Hashim ke ghar ko dekhiye ipne gharane ko’ (4: 189/121). 
65 Anis ke Marsiye, 2: p. 94/ 16; 4: p, 125/22.
66 Ibid. 5: p.153/137.
67 Ibid. 7: p, 204/3055.
68 Ibid. 9: p, 245/46.
69 Ibid. 1: p. 286/113. 
70 ibid. 33: p. 373/140.
71 Ibid. 15: p. 420/111.
72 Anis ke marsiye, p 55.
73 Ibid. 13: 376/157. 
74 Ibid. 3: p, 110/55.
75 Ibid. 9: p. 262/145.
76 Ibid. 9: p. 26246.
77 Ibid. 9: p. 262/146.
78 Ibid. 10: p. 294/157.
79 Ibid. 12: 347/148. 
80 Ibid. 10: p. 294/159.
81 Ibid. 10: p. 296/173. 
82 Ibid. 10: p. 97/1771.
83 Ibid. 5: 147/93.
84 Ibid. 5: p, 150/119; 6: p, 173/7; 8: p, 243/35.
85 Ibid. 7: p, 204/55;12: p. 325/13.
86.ibid. 5: p, 148/104.
87 Ibid. 8: p, 244/37.
 88 Intikhab-I Marasi-I Mirza Dabir, !: 56/95;. 57/99; 78/204;  2: 101/73 122/176;  3: 144/93; 151/125;   93; 151/125; 17: 550/23; 8: 327/132. AH
89 19: 597/25; 13: 449/38; 11: 396/47 AH
90 Anis ke Marsiye, 1:p.84/138; 1: 85/147; 2: 97/33,99/45; 5: 151/123: 5: 408/39; 6: 187/91; 7:  204/55;  
  10: p. 273/35; 288/23; 12: 325/13; 10: p. 301/13; 2: p. 339/96; 14: p. 392/94; 
 16: p. 4267/2; 17: 453/31. 
91 Anis ke Marsiye, 9: p, 246/52; sawant (brave). 
92 Ibid. 9: P, 246/51.
93 Ibid. 9: p. 258/120.
94 Ibid. 7: p.204/55.
95 Ibid. 10: 279/71; 280/73``chhor kar bag, fars ko zara garmaya.’
96 Ibid. 8: p, 237/114.
97 Ibid. 10: p. 297/3.
98 Ibid. sun ke ye bag jo li…’ 182/ 82.
99 Ibid. 6: p, 192/121,` bag ghore ki firana tha ke barchhi khai.’
100 Ibid. 6: p,188/100.
101 Ibid. 7: p,216/127.
102 Ibid. 10: p. 280/75 `tori hai safen jang mein jab khet pare hain.’
103 Ibid. 14: p. 393/99 `ran par jo charha ho,vahi jaane ke ye kya tha.’ 
104 Ibid. 15: p. 414/74 chhalava is a spirit, which quickly changes form.
105 Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 15: p. 419/104.
106 Ibid. 9: 355/126.
107 Ibid. 14: 473/14; There are many more examples of the typical idioms and phrases of the women of the Awadh region in the marsiyas of Dabir:
 hai hai mujhe to aur ye visvas ab hua (1: 57/97). 
taqdir mujhe unki maut aisi  raas laaye (1: 66/141). 
bisvas mujh ko aata hai tashvish hoti hai (3: 131/33).
kis ki nazar lagi meri ma ki kamai ko (7: 278’45).
aakhir kahan sidharte ho kuchh batawo to (10:362/19).
aye nur-i nazar kis ki nazar kha gayi tum ko ( 9: 354/124).
ye lal teri chand si surat ke main sadqe (9: 337/38).Qaqsim’s martyrdom, mother
ye byah meri ladli ko ras na aaya (9: 337/35)Banu
nausha zamane se sidhara (9: 352/112).
ghar lutne ka, sar khulne ka, visvas nahin hai  (13: 446/22).
pani se nihalon ko hara sab ne kiya hai (13: 447/27). (Banu to Akbar)
maine abhi beton ka lahu munh pe mala hai (13: 449/38).
beta kisi ko dagh na bete ka de khuda(14: 471/10)
mar jaaye ma, pe lakht-i jigar se juda na ho
marsiya, aye bagh –i taba`rang-i bahar –i sukhun dikha, also projects her well.)
wo boli, han kaleje pe paththar dharungi main (14: 473/20) Zainub bids farewell to Akbar.
bibi ki kokh ujar gayi, hye hye ghazab hua (17: 555/47).
108 Ab –i  Hayat, p. 333.
109 Anis ke Marsiye, 7: p, 200/30, 32.
110 Ibid. 8: p, 245/44.
111 ibid. 8 : p, 245/45. 
112 Ibid. 15: p. 409/48.
113 Ibid. 18: pp. 490/69.
114 Ibid. 1; p. 81/141.
115 Ibid. 5:p. 146/93.
116 Ibid. 15: 515/101 AH.
117 Ibid. 16: p.431/49.
118 Ibid. 16: pp.426- 432/20-50,52-55.
119 Ibid. 9: p, 248/ 60-65.
120 Ibid. We find similar depiction in Indarsabha:
     ` sabha mein doston Indar ki amad amad hai’   
121 ibid. 4: 122/2 ;123/11 A.
122 ibid. 8: p, 229/67A.
123 ibid. 17: p. 454/37 A.
124 Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 2: 110/117 D.
125 ibid. 3: 133/34.
126 Ibid. 10: 359/7.
127 Ibid. 12: 420/26).
128 Anis ke Marsiye, 11: p. 307/53. 
129 Ibid. : p. 307/49.
130 Ibid. 15: p.404/15.
131 Ibid. 15: 499/503; see Sarapa of Abbas ( 8: 305-312/22-55).
132 Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, `putli hai koh –i tur -i tajalli’ 6: 244/41; `ye tir-i kahkashan hai kaman-i hilal hai’ 6: 244/42; 247/57 248/62 etc.).
ab tak kisi ne Hur ka sarapa kaha na tha (3: 149/115.

134 Ibid. 16: p. 447/149.  
135aye mere randape ke sahare (Abbas’s wife to her sons); see Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 8: 326/125).
han bain karo lash pe sehre ko barhao; ibid. (9: 355128).
ro ro ke bain Fatima Kubra ne ye kahe; ibid. (12: 441/134).
Iran ke ujale Arabistan ke ujale; ibid. (15: 515/103) The relatioship with Iran is strengthened because of the Iranian origin of the Awadh dynesty. 
136 See, Anis ke Marsiye, 
raanden saf-i matam se uthin khole huye sar (9: p. 266/172).
Zainub ne sar par duhaththar kai maare (9: p. 266/168)
Bikhra ke sar ke bal haram sath sath the (12: p.324/11)
deorhi se chalo matami saf ghar mein bichhao (15: p. 418/98)
gardan mein la ke shaal-i `aza dal dejiye (Akbar to zainub 16:p. 431/48)
matam ki saf pe baith gayi koi nohagar (14: p. 398/ 128)
randsala lavo zuja- i`Abbas ke liye (14: p. 398/129)
bikhra diye Husain ki bahinon ne sar ke baal (14: 398/130) 
jis tareh peet ta hai koi sogvar sar  (14: p. 397/124)
chillaya chaak karke gareban ko sogvar (14: p. 398/126)
maare gaye jihad mein `Abbas bawafa (14: p. 398/127)
kal thee suhagan aaj to main sogvaar hun (14: p. 399/ 135 
 aye gul –badanon, kis ki nazar kha gayi tum ko (9: p. 265/165)
Fizza, the wifeofAbbas performs bain:
bhaati thee jis ke baalon ki bu aapko kamal  ussne tumhaare sog mein bikhara diye hain bal (9: p).
137 ibid. 9: p.265/166; Husain mourns the death of Abbas and performs bain in the following manner:
Ghurbat mein lut gaya mera ghar hai hai hai   sidhi na hogi ab ye kamar hai hai hai
Taza hai aaj dagh-i pider hai hai hai    kata gaya chhuri se jigar hai hai hai
                             Abbas kya jahan se gaye ham guzar gaye
                              Muhsin hua shahid Hasan aaj mar gaye (14: 394/103).
138 Ibid. 5: p. 166/211.
139 Ibid. `tazi ko tez karke ye ghazi ne di sada’,16: p. 440/103; 18: p. 502/140.
140 Ibid. 18: pp. 482-506.
141 Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 16: 537/87.
142 Ibid. 11: 409/110; also 399/63.
143 Anis ke Marsiye, jab bolte the sher todar jate the bachhe (10: p. 269/6). 
144 Ibid. 7: p, 195/6; pp.195-6/1-8.
145 Ibid. 12: 323/3.
146 Ibid. 12: p. 323/2.
147 For instance see his marsiyas, `tai kar chuka jo manzil-i shab karvan-i subh’; jab zulf ko khole huye laila-i shab aayi’; `phula shafaq se,charkh par jab lalazar subh;’ see Anis ke marsiye, pp, 195-217, 268-298, 323-349. 
148 Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 1: 53/77.
149 Ibid. 3: 127/7.
150 Ibid. 3: 129/14.
151 Ibid. 2: 100/ 48  A.
152 Anis ke Marsiye, 3: 102-121; Also see, 9: 253-55/94-103; 10: 274/36-38 12: 324-26/11-19; 13: 362-63 /75-79.
153 Intikhab-i Marasi-i Mirza Dabir, 2: 116/145.
154 Ibid. 12: 440-41/128-133.
155 Ibid. 17: 545-568; Shah bole tum logon ne chhora hai kisi ko    shishmahe ke bhi gham mein karvaya mere ji  ko (2: 116/145). The dialogues commence for long in this way (2: 116-121/149-170).
156 Ibid. 3:141/76.
157 Ibid. 3:138-141/62-78.
158.ibid. 6: 251-54/78-906: 252/83.
159 Ibid. 6: 253/84.
160 Ibid.7: 278-79/47-55; 7: 287/90. 
161 Ibid. 15: 495-519.
162 Ibid. 17: 555/48.
163 Ibid. 18: 569-591.
164 Ibid. 13: 445/16.
165 Ibid. 13: 449/34.
166 Anis ke Marsiye, 15: 421/.
167 Hasan thhare jamuna kinare,
      bajaven bansi jamuna ki ret mein 
168 ibid. 14: 397/121.
169 Intikhab-I Marasi-I Mirza Dabir, 2: 122/175. 
170 Ibid. 2: 122/176.
171 Ibid. 2: 122/177: The dialague with the invisible God continues upto 179 band, p. 122.
172 Ibid. Akash-bani 3: 157/157.also see: `us vaqt aayi alam –i lahut se nida (11: 398/58; at the time of rukhsat of Husain to the battlefield).
aayi sada ye arsh se aye hamil-i bala (11: 399/60 rukhsat to Husain by Zainub). 
173 Ibid. 
Fatima to Zainub: aye meri jayi saman-i som bhi kuchh kar lo (see 8: 329/141)
aayi ye nida , pas hun main, dur kahan hun (8:329/140).
randsala bahu ke main pinhane ko hun aayi    ik hulla, pur nur hun, firdaus se lai (8: 329/141).
 aayi nida `Ali ki tu kyon behawaas hai (7: 285/78At the time of Hur’s death).
174 Ibid. 8:326/128;  8:326/129;  327/132 .
175 ibid. 12: 441/130; 12: 441/131 2; 441/132.
176 Ibid. 9: 332/14-15.

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------




30


